So we all know that story..
The king has probably one or two kids..
And the mom dies.. and the king remarries..
and the EVIL stepmother comes and gives impossible
tasks to the princes.
She calls them one by one, and tells them,
these are the things you have to do, .. take
a couple of your soldiers, and using those
soldiers, get this done.
And, what are those ‘impossible’ tasks?
Bring the elephant to the first-floor balcony…
Then, you have to boil the ocean.
And.. count the number of grains in the sea-shore..
Just bring the right tally number, down to
the last digit.
And, a cup of yogurt from the milk one gets
from the Palace Bull.
One prince comes, and says, sorry, I can’t,
the other prince comes, gets angry, gives
up, but the third prince, he is happy..
He is smiling.
Guess why?
Namaste!
Four hundred and twenty-eight.
That story featuring the king, the queen,
the stepmother, and those three princes..
We were looking at that, weren’t we?
Why was that third guy happy?
You know why?
He was happy because the Evil Stepmother Queen
had said, “You, and a couple of soldiers”…
but she hadn’t specified who to take along…
“I can pick my team!, I can pick my super-performers!”
That made that guy happy.
That confidence…
“If given the right people, I can boil the
ocean!
I can milk the bull!”
That is the whole concept of putting the right
team together.
If you get on the internet and do some searching,
you will probably find a million articles
about interviewing skills and the right way
to attract talent.
I read a few of them, myself.
Particularly the ones that were intriguing,
interesting, unusual..
I thought it would be a good idea to put them
all together.
I have used some of those in my own life.
And, I am going to throw it at you and see
how
you react.
First up, let us all understand this..
Something we should all understand and internalise.
Particularly, if we are in the IT / Hitech
field..
“The Leader doesn’t know everything!”.
A few years ago, this concept called the Servant
Leadership spread far and wide.
“The person above is not supposed to be
taken care of by everybody below them…
The person above is not the “Command and
Control” person, but, they should instead
strive to EMPOWER.
They should put effort to demonstrate the
servant-leadership structure.
My primary role is to resolve any problems
you may be facing.
Obstacle Remover.
Vigna Vinaayak.
You do your work.
You are amazing.”
That is the first understanding we need to
have when thinking about growing our team.
It is not command and control.
It is serve and help remove obstacles.
You search for Leadership, and you are immediately
greeted by pictures like this..!
But, guess what is the unstated fact of the
matter in this picture?
The Leader is the one BELOW!
Because, the truth is, whether you agree or
not, based on my personal experience, the
millennials, the post-millennials who are
crowding these high-technology environments,
they can run circles around us… oldies.
Oh, yes, they would immediately quip, “We
have wisdom, you just have knowledge!…
We have experience!”..
oh, yes, all that is true.
But, when it comes to raw work, that horsepower,
getting things done, putting hand to code,
conceiving, creating, coding, debugging, fixing,
launching, leave these guys alone.
These guys and girls.
They will do such a good job, you will be
left panting!
So, the idea is, please do not think, “I
can do this easily..
If only I have the time..
I am looking for a teammate only because I
don’t have the time for it..”
You are supposed to attract talent that can
do far better than you.
In the work that matters.
Please understand that, when talking about
growing your team.
This is Ricardo Semler.
Semco is a very large oil conglomerate company
in Brazil.
He inherited that company from his father.
He didn’t like how the company was performing,
and when he dug deeper, he didn’t like how
the company was structured.
So, he became the Chief Empowerment Officer
of the company, and came up with beautiful
ideas.
He is at it still.. in the fields of education
and leadership.
He is teaching the world many of his philosophies.
He has penned these two books too.
Interesting ones.
You can judge these two by the covers themselves!
The Seven-Day Weekend, and the Maverick.
He wowed us with a lot of really controversial
counter-intuitive ideas!
One of those ideas?
I personally was very intrigued when I read
about it, and I implemented it too, in my
team.
And, it was pretty interesting.
That idea is about recruitment.
Say, we have a hierarchical structure like
this.
This green-person has left and the slot is
empty.
And, we are going to recruit a person to fill
that place.
Elsewhere, in most companies, you know how
the interview structure would be?
This person, because of the direct reporting
structure, this person will interview.
Probably boss’s boss..
She may want to have a look too.
And, rarely, but yes, sometimes, they will
also invite the sideways boss..
“Sir, please, join me in evaluating somebody
who is joining my team…
Give me your thoughts..”
That is where the matter will end.
But, do you know how it would go in Semco?
This is how it would go.
At Semco, that same slot… it will be interviewed
by THIS person.
Peer interview.
“Is somebody coming into this company for
a role similar to mine?
I would like to know about them!”
And this person..
And, these people..
They are going to be immediately managed by
this person..
“I am not sure if they understood the culture
well enough..
How our company works..
What makes it tick…
No idea if they know about it..
My day to day work, my long term goals, this
is the person who is going to drive..
I would like to have a say..
I have been here in this company for quite
some time..”
Why!
Even these!
Even these people!
Because that division is going to be managed
by this man or this woman..
Can we get inputs??
That was the philosophy at Semco!
Okay, you have to interviewed…
yes, of course, it is a respectful, two-way
interview.
But he ensured that people under that empty
slot had a say in deciding who comes in.
And that helped the company, and the bottomline
really shot up, it became very famous, amazing
story..
Read the books for more details!
This, is Joel Spolsky.
Joel Spolsky is famous in programmer / techie
circles as a startup founder, but also as
a visionary thinker.
He has written quite a few books, and he has
a famous blog too.
A blog that is still running, after all these
years!
Fog Creek Software was the company he founded.
Again, lots of interesting, twisty, unusual
philosophies that he propagated.
One of them is about the camel hump.
This is an Arabian camel.
We have seen quite a few members of this species.
Dromedary, they call it.
But, there is another camel type too.
Bactrian, they call it.
Inhabits “cold deserts”.
One hump.
Two humps.
That is the most important difference!
Talking about humps, you would immediately
look at it as the normalised bell curve.
Poor performers, average performers, top performers.
People who don’t know anything at all, people
who know a little bit, people who know very
well..
Always, the bell curve!
Even Virat Kohli’s scores in T20 cricket?
Bell curve!
But…
Joel Spolsky says, the bell curve distribution
for people who can do good software is not
a Dromedary, but is actually a Bactrian!
That would mean, it would look something like
this.
The curve on the left?
The curve of those who don’t know anything
about programming!
But, because of good communication skills
or a flashy demeanour, they somehow go to
the right extreme and we, when interviewing
them, think they are the left extreme of the
curve of the people who really know how to
program!
So, if you are going to interview somebody,
the most important task ahead of you is to
find out which curve the person is actually
falling on..!
Because, … if that person is belonging to
the previous curve, the one where they don’t
know the fundamentals but they are having
the street-smarts to look as if they know
everything…
you are done for!
If you involve a person like that in your
company, in your team, that would be the end
of you!
Ensure they are in the right-side-curve.
How do you do that?
There is this professor..
Serge Lang.
He is a Calculus kingpin.
Many textbooks of mathematics in the US college
curriculum were actually authored by him.
He would appear in the classroom, first day,
first show, of his course..
Advanced Calculus.
And he would conduct a silly-simple test..
Okay!
Solve the system of equations, .. what is
the sine of….
Show that…
A very simple set.
Finish it in fifteen minutes…!
His theory?
Based on observing generations of students
pass through his portals year after year?
(He has got empirical evidence at least!)
His theory is, if you do something silly-simple,
very fast, you have a chance, you stand a
chance, for doing well in the hard complex
stuff..
If you are going to someday be proficient
with the advanced stuff, you would crack these
silly-simple things blindingly fast, correctly,
just like that!
You take it or leave it, but this man is famous
for having done this across generations of
students, and there is some data to prove
what he is saying is right.
What is the computer science equivalent of
this?
Well…
Typically, if you are called for a coding
interview, you would face a “Fizzbuzz”
problem..
What is that?
You have numbers 1 to 15…
Or, even 1 to…
N. Perhaps 10,000.
You have to print these on the screen.
But, while printing, all multiples of three,
you will have to print Fizz instead, all multiples
of five, you will have to print Buzz instead,
and … three and five?
If the number is a multiple of both of these,
print FizzBuzz instead!
It is pretty famous..
Just a simple query on Google will show you
articles about the “famous” FizzBuzz problem,
etc.
Might look silly, but, even here, what algorithm
are you going to use, how efficient, how much
space, how much time, is it going to be occupying…
These will be the parameters that will perhaps
showcase your ability!
While interviewing, they give us three warnings..
To beware of.
Three things to NOT END UP DOING!
The first warning is, just don’t be the
Quiz Master.
Whack.
Here is my question.
There is your answer.
Whack again.
Here is another question.
There is your answer.
Whack again and again.
Back and forth.
Won’t work!
It is not some trivia contest..
Programming, particularly?
Software?
Building software?
Is not about you remembering the difference
between varchar1 and varchar2.
No.
That’s not how it works.
Right now, we have tools that will intelligently
recommend to you, prompt to you, without cutting
your flow of thought, to help you with problems
in your code, in your syntax.
The attempt here should not be about quizzing
the other person with short questions.
At the same time, do not become this kind
of interviewer.
The interviewer who… asks everything they
know.. allowing only very short ripostes from
the interviewee..
Probably you are boasting about your ability,
your knowledge, you are not interested in
asking the person to demonstrate what they
know!
And, the third little warning?
Some interviewers have this strategy..
They say, “I want to put that person in
a situation of discomfort.
I want to throw them into the middle of the
deep sea!
I want to see how they survive..
I want to see how they swim to safety.
I want to see how they save themselves from
drowning!
That is a test of their character!”
they would say.
That is what they do..
This is what they end up going through.
Probably, yes, there are sometimes when such
an interview works, but most of the time,
you are testing them for an environment they
would never be in, hopefully.
If your company is a well-run one, if your
company and your team respect their employees,
if you are a company that doesn’t foist
unnecessary artificial pressure on your employees,
then, this is not what they will ever go through
again, is it not?
So, what is the point then, exposing them
to something like this?
Instead, why don’t you find out what they
know really, and find out whether they know
it really!
Put them at ease.
Have a coffee.
Go on a walk around campus.
That is what you should aim for.
Calm.
Relax.
Take it easy.
And then find out what they are capable of.
There is this other matter of “Experience”.
I have done this for ten years.
I am a fifteen-years-experienced Java expert…
Do not fall for this experience myth.
For, there are two kinds of people…
The “young upstarts” who mature amazingly
fast.
“I have been with it for just six months
but I know it inside out.
I know..
There is nothing more for me to actively learn.
It is only about active implementation and
experimentation” — they say..
Similarly, the eternally raw, immature folks
exist too.
Ten years experienced, they would claim.
But no.
They have just experienced the first year
ten times.
Do you want that?
Do you want a person who hasn’t explored
the edges of knowledge?
So, don’t fall for that Experience Myth.
In fact there are a lot of applicants who,
actively search out, and if they see this
phrase “Number of years of experience”
in a job application, they actively CHOOSE
not to go to that company..
For, if you are a company that respects this
kinda stuff, I know what kinda company you
are.. they conclude and they keep away.
Finally, in any team environment there will
always be problems.
They have researched this much.
Interviewed numerous people in numerous occasions,
and arrived at this conclusion.
It could SEEM like any kind of problem.
Code problem.
Deadline problem.
Demo problem.
Customer understanding problem.
Market fitment problem.
Whatever it may seem like…
But, if you analyse and get to the root cause,
you will realise that it is a PEOPLE problem.
And so, whoever you end up choosing, however
superman-wonderwoman-grade the person is,
ensure they know how to work with other people.
Because, there is no concept of a single lone
wolf ever launching something amazing.
You have to work with people.
And, that tall claim that people make about
recruiting the Top One Percent of candidates..!
I look at one hundred people, and select just
one among them…
Farcical.
Please realise, probably some of the best
candidates aren’t even in the market.
Please remember that.
You are selecting the top one percent of the
people who are applying, who are floating
around in the job market, who are applying
to your company.
Don’t foolishly call that Top One Percent!
Have that humility!
As a closing thought, here is a commentary
about résumés.
You know this person.
Jack Ma.
But, did you know?
When he was fifteen years old, he had a pen
pal in Australia, to whom he would write letters
in broken English… (he became an English
teacher by the way, before he became the CEO
of Alibaba!)..
that letter used to be written in double-spacing..
Why?
That other boy would correct his English,
the spelling, grammar, style, and send it
back to him!
Did you know!
It shows grit!
Oprah Winfrey.
Molested at the age of fourteen.
She became pregnant.
The baby died.
What kind of impact that would have had on
her life?
Would we have known?
What about Mark Zuckerberg..?
At one point of time, he was in a dilemma..
Should I focus my energies on Facebook, or
should I instead build Wirehog, this new amazing
tool for filesharing that I have come up with
working from my dorm?!
What made him choose Facebook?
Do we have an insight into it?
What about Bill Gates?
Paul Allen and he, went to a computer company
in the neighbourhood.
Promised to “find bugs” in the system.
And, instead of money in return, they just
asked for time at the computer, as a return
favour!
What kind of innovation is that?
What kind of go-getting mentality is that?
Well then, these four stories that we saw,
would we ever be able to see those in their
résumés?
Would they ever talk about it?
Their failures, their challenges, their childhood-impactful-moments?
We will never be able to gather that.
So, your aim, as an interviewer, .. if somebody
offers you their résumé, just place it respectfully
to the side, and understand the movie of their
life.
Take them back in time.
Look for those trigger points.
Those turning moments.
Understand how they have reacted.
Understand how they have adjusted.
Adopted.
Adapted.
That will tell you a better story than any
paper résumé.
Don’t you agree?!
Alright, let us meet again in just a few more
days!
Thank you!